DEMELZA: # Mem'ries like
voices that call on the wind
# Medhel an gwyns, medhel an gwyns
# Whispered and tossed
on the tide coming in
# Medhel, oh medhel an gwyns
# Songs like the dreams
that the bal maidens spin
# Medhel an gwyns, medhel an gwyns
# Weaving the song of the cry of the tin
# Medhel, oh medhel an gwyns
# Voices like songs that
are heard in the dawn
# Medhel an gwyns, medhel an gwyns
# Singing the secrets of children unborn
# Medhel, oh medhel an gwyns
Does he think 'ee can buy
we off with fag ends?
Hush, you black worm.
Cap'n Ross already be looking after we by
turning a blind eye to us living in his barn.
- Do he know we live here?
- Course he do.
Bless him for it and you too.
And curse 'ee! You miserly mongrel!
- Ooh, I could leather the arse off him.
- ( Chuckles)
( Bell tolling)
It's an impressive operation,
the smelting works on Trevaunance's land.
Hm. Though it's difficult, I imagine,
without any actual copper.
Yes, pity it will shortly
no longer be required.
Their mines produce a fraction
of what's needed.
At the last four auctions they were outbid.
If they get no more copper at the next auction,
well, surely that will be death knell for Carnmore.
Were I Sir John Trevaunance I might regret
having a brand-new smelting works on my land
and my money invested...
with nothing to produce.
You should go, dear.
Kate'll be wanting you.
- How is the child, Jinny?
- She's better, Cap'n Poldark, sur.
Doctor Enys says
it is not the putrid throat, after all.
- That's a mercy.
- 'Tis, sur.
Only this week there's
three dead of it in Sawle.
Here. Take these for you and Jim's mother.
I'm that glad to serve 'ee again, ma'am.
I know you can scarce afford me.
Jinny, if we did what we could afford
we wouldn't get out of bed.
( Julia grizzling)
- She has a new tooth coming.
- Soon she'll be able to bite like Garrick.
( Chuckles)
What's this?
It's from Verity.
AUNT AGATHA: When will Verity be home?
FRANCIS: This is not Verity's home.
My throat's afire.
Get Mrs Tabb to fetch me a posset.
She's unwell. All the servants are unwell.
I'm not unwell.
93 and the appetite of a girl of 20.
If Verity were here
she'd prescribe honey and liquorice.
- Doctor Choake prescribes leeches.
- I've no faith in Doctor Choake.
No, nor I. And even less in Verity.
Verity seems content.
So your experiment ended well.
And yours?
Carnmore?
Our hopes are pinned on tomorrow's auction.
We've scraped together
enough capital to bid high.
If we get sufficient copper we'll survive.
If we had more capital
we'd stand a better chance.
I wish to help. Let me help.
We could raise a mortgage on Nampara.
Already raised.
You could sell my brooch and my best frock.
By no means. We're not yet so desperate
that I must steal the gown off your back.
But I would feel better
if I could somehow make amends.
I'll be home tomorrow.
Tonight I'll stay at the Red Lion.
It'll go well at the auction.
You'll win all your bids.
Get all the copper you need
and Carnmore will be safe.
- DEMELZA: Wave.
- ( Horse whinnies)
- You're wasting away.
- I've no time for feasting.
Since Keren's death
you take no care of yourself.
Since her husband's exile
I try to care for those he left behind.
You've had word of him.
Safe and well in France
with no plans to return.
So you may cease to lash yourself
into a frenzy of work.
May I, with this latest epidemic?
- The putrid throat.
- I'm struggling to contain it.
Whole families have gone under.
- If the poor were better fed and housed...
- It's no respecter of privilege.
Choake has been summoned to Trenwith.
Who has it there?
All of them, I believe.
- Can you not call?
- They're Choake's patients.
He'd resent my interference.
Besides, I lay no claim to a cure. Sometimes
the weak survive and the strong go under.
Stand aside, Mr Poldark.
We are on urgent business.
I won't detain you.
I came to enquire after the family.
Is it the putrid throat?
Morbus Strangulatorius?
What fool gave you that idea?
We have isolated the symptoms, we have applied
remedies, and they are all on the mend.
- So soon?
- 'Tis merely a question of competent treatment.
They'll be up and about in no time.
Oh...
( Francis coughs)
I have next to dispose of a dole of ore
from United Mines.
50 tons. Sold to the South Wales Smelting
Company for seven pounds, 16 shillings a ton.
Do you want some bread?
Hm?
( Footsteps, door opens)
'Ee've heard the news from Trenwith?
Tell me.
Wheal Busy. Parcel of red copper, 45 tons.
Sold to the South Wales Smelting Company
for eight pounds, four shillings a ton.
All the servants ill? Not
one fit to tend them?
And Doctor Choake called away to Truro.
And not back till morning.
Wheal Leisure, 40 tons.
Wheal Leisure is sold to
the South Wales Smelting Company
for seven pounds, 19 shillings.
And that concludes the auction for today.
Thank you, gentlemen.
( Sighs)
If I'm not back by nightfall, see Julia's
milk boiled and that she's put to bed.
Are we all that remain?
The Warleggans have been most efficient.
I call to order this meeting
of the Carnmore Copper Company.
Proceed, sir.
I have to report that today, yet again,
we got no copper.
Since the prospect seems
unlikely to change...
We bow to the inevitable.
It is with extreme regret that I declare
the Carnmore Copper Company dissolved.
Ross. You're becoming a hermit.
Margaret was only saying how much
she's missed you at our gaming parties.
- I've no time for cards these days.
- Cousin Matthew will be sad to hear that.
You know Margaret's on her third lord.
( Chuckles)
I don't know how
but she sucks the life out of her lovers.
- Her instinct for survival is voracious.
- And you should know.
She told me she once had
a fancy to marry you.
- Not you?
- Oh, my sights are set somewhat higher.
And how's your wife?
She was much remarked on at the last ball.
You should bring her out more.
- We've no time for socialising, George.
- The smelting company keeps you busy?
- Wheal Leisure.
- Ah, yes.
One of the few mines which still
offer prospects for the investor.
I believe some shares
are shortly coming on to the market.
And whose are they?
Oh, I... I understood them to be yours.
But perhaps I was misinformed.
You were.
AUNT AGATHA: Verity?
- Is that you?
- No, it's Demelza.
Ross' little bud.
I came to enquire after the family.
They're sick, every last jack of 'em.
And who's to care for
'em, with Verity gone?
She'd no business to go. Her duty's here.
'Twas a selfish, cruel thing she did
to leave us like that.
( Coughing)
GEORGE: It goes without saying
I would offer a generous price.
I have no control over my partners.
You could approach one of them.
What is it that offends you, Ross?
That we Warleggans have dared to drag ourselves
out of poverty and aspire to gentility?
Poverty doesn't offend
me, nor does aspiration.
But you are mistaken if you think greed and
exploitation are the marks of a gentleman.
You know, one of these days, you'll find
yourself without means, without colleagues,
without friends,
and with no one to blame, but yourself.
Good day to you, George.
( Gulls cry)
( Indistinct conversation)
Demelza.
I came to see if I could help.
Oh. That's very kind of you.
I'm in despair.
My poor little boy.
He has these spasms.
Then he vomits, and there's relief.
But only for a time, and
then it begins again.
You're sick yourself, Elizabeth.
You ought to be in bed.
I cannot leave my boy.
I'll stay with him.
I'll stay and look after you all.
( Sobs)
The man imagined
he could drive up copper prices.
( Chuckling)
- And get a fairer deal for the mines.
- GEORGE: And so he did.
Until we became wise and outbid him.
And now?
His smelting works stand idle.
- The price of copper will fall again.
- He'll be left with enormous debts.
And no obvious means to discharge them.
Perhaps he will throw
himself upon your mercy.
He may try. Hm.
Excuse me.
It must be galling to have nothing but
debt to show for 12 months of hard labour.
Bad enough... to see your assets
now in enemy hands.
The smelting works on Trevaunance's land?
What did you hear?
That Sir John, after battling
against the wind for months...
is now preparing to sail with it.
By selling to the Warleggans?
He must cover his losses.
( Sighs) While the rest of us go bankrupt.
If the servants hadn't been so ill...
But Doctor Choake said
half the village is down.
Ssh. You ought to rest.
( Moans)
- Who is it?
- Demelza.
She's come to help us.
It's good of her to...
overlook past quarrels.
Hm.
So my own debts...
in addition to the mortgage on Nampara?
Around 900 pounds.
More than I feared.
You have assets.
My shares in Wheal Leisure.
I was approached only yesterday
by a man named Cole, with a good offer.
One that could clear all your debts.
For all of my shares?
I got the impression he'd go even higher.
Oh, he would.
On behalf of his master, George Warleggan.
As you once remarked:
Beggars cannot be choosers.
But this time I can.
The Warleggans have a habit
of buying up mines and closing them down
just to suppress competition
to their own holdings.
I'll be damned
if I let that happen to Wheal Leisure.
So?
So...
I require capital of 1,000 pounds.
Without security.
( Chuckles)
( Sizzling)
Here. It will ease the rawness.
Will he die?
Not if I can help it.
Any luck?
Would I call it that?
To saddle a man with a 12-month loan,
at interest of 40 per cent?
I urge you to reconsider.
Start again.
Rather than plunge in so deep
there might be no getting out.
I'll take my chance.
- The odds are against you.
- I know it.
And should I doubt it, the sight of Matthew
Sanson parading about like a prize cockerel...
Permitted to trade and socialise
as if his integrity were not in tatters.
Who's to gainsay him?
The Warleggans
are complete masters of the district.
- And the ship?
- The Queen Charlotte.
Their latest venture.
- They seem pleased with her.
- They consider her their flagship enterprise.
And themselves unassailable.
You shouldn't be out alone at dusk.
Poverty breeds desperate men.
You have news?
It will keep.
There's sickness at Trenwith...
Geoffrey Charles had it worst.
But I believe the crisis has passed.
That's a relief.
I may never forgive Francis, but I would not
wish the putrid throat to my worst enemy.
- Ross?
- Yes?
I swore I would never keep secrets
from you again.
And so?
I went to Trenwith.
- But they turned you away?
- No.
- I stayed all last night.
- Oh, in God's name!
Ross, I had to. They were all so sick.
Even the servants.
They had no one to tend them.
And Geoffrey Charles was so weak.
Twice I thought I him gone.
But this morning he brought round and...
Doctor Choake says the worst is now over.
- I cannot believe you would do such a...
- What would you have done?
What did you do? For Jim Carter.
You're right.
It was a kind and generous act. Perhaps in a
fortnight I'll be in the mood to appreciate it.
( Thunder rumbles)
( Baby wailing)
( Wailing continues)
- DEMELZA: Sssh.
- Put on a gown or you'll catch a chill.
I'm hot. 'Tis she that is cold.
- Bring her to bed.
- ( Julia continues wailing)
Sssh. Sssh.
My throat is dry. I'll get some water.
Sssh.
What is it?
My throat is swollen.
You have a rash.
( Thunder crashes)
( Door opens)
They both have it.
The symptoms are unmistakable.
How bad will it be?
If they get through the night...
Dear God.
- Surely...
- There's no reliable treatment.
What can I do?
Pray.
( Moaning and panting)
Sssh, sssh.
- Can you hear me, my love?
- ( Moans)
Can you hear me? Demelza?
Try to drink this. Just a sip.
- She won't take it.
- Her fever's worsening.
Can you save her?
( Panting)
TOM CARNE:
Saved? Are ye saved, daughter?
Are ye saved?
( Distorted) Are ye saved?
( Distorted) Saved? From what?
An impudent troll like that.
- You must get her to drink something.
- TOM: Drink is the devil's work.
Turn away, daughter.
Come home and live a clean and pure life.
- There's little more I can do.
- ROSS: You must fight, my love.
- You must fight.
- TOM: Fight me? Fight me? Come on, then.
Come on!
Corn. We must have corn. How else
are we meant to feed our starving children?
15 shillings a bushel.
15 shillings and not a penny less.
Demelza, do not underestimate
the scale of your ignorance.
Your arrogance, your utter disregard
for truth and consequence.
She's failing. She's failing.
- What can I do?
- ELIZABETH: Let go, my dear. Let go.
I'll take care of Ross.
You know he would rather be with me.
( Thunder rumbles)
Forgive me.
Forgive me, I cannot save her.
( Julia grizzles)
I will stay with her.
I would not have her be afraid.
Julia...
Poldark will not be
bothering us for a while.
Because?
He'll be otherwise engaged.
( Clears his throat) With what?
His daughter's burial.
( Birdsong)
( Footsteps)
- You should try to rest.
- Should have provided for them.
Who?
It's custom after the burial.
The winter's been savage. The least
I could have done was fed and watered them.
Who would expect it?
They know of Demelza's illness.
- Everything I touch is cursed.
- You cannot believe that.
- So many came.
- Yes.
- So many...
- They care for you.
I should have provided for them.
There's no change - for
better or for worse.
You should take some air.
And then sleep.
( Wind whistles)
The maiden voyage of the Queen Charlotte...
The demise of the Carnmore
Copper Company...
and its chief architect.
( Thunder rumbles)
Something amiss?
Far from it. Today I omitted
to provide for the mourners.
Now that will be remedied.
Jud! Jud, wake up!
God damn if a man's not king of his own...
There's a wreck, Jud.
- Where? Where's she...?
- Hendrawna beach.
Go rouse the others -
Sawle and Marasanvose!
- Why bring it to all they?
- She's a prize of a ship carrying food.
They'll be pickings for all. Zacky! Zacky.
Hendrawna beach. There's a wreck.
- Paul, go rouse the village.
- What is she?
Brigantine. Grain aboard, pilchards.
Enough to fill your bellies for a month.
How do you know?
I know who owns her.
Yaaargh! Yaargh!
( Chatter)
How long will we wait?
My gizzards is rumbling.
You'll be fed soon enough.
Paul, Zacky, get the fires going.
Tell the women to form a line
and keep the children clear.
Hellfire and damnation.
- It cannot be.
- Hendrawna beach. Isn't that...
Poldark land.
( Ross calls out)
Feed the children first.
They'll be plenty for all later.
( Grunts) These people should hang.
Give me a rope, I'll do it myself.
- Captain Bray must testify.
- To what?
To the plunder and lawlessness.
No, better still... Matthew.
- He can testify against Poldark.
- Always assuming he witnesses.
Whether he witnesses or not!
Good God, boy, you don't suggest
we wait for actual evidence?
Matthew is a gentleman.
He's a Warleggan.
Worth two of any Poldarks
and his word will carry twice the weight.
And I'll be damned if we don't turn
this debacle to our advantage!
( Chatter and shouting)
( Chatter and laughter)
( Laughter)
- Do we think he'll be there?
- If the reports are true...
- If his daughter...
- He may not be in the mood for plunder.
- And then again, he may.
- And if he is?
He'll be caught in the act.
Cap'n Ross! Cap'n Ross.
- They be coming from 'Luggan.
- Who?
Why, the blatherin' miners.
They saw the boat up from the cliff
and followed it round the coast to here.
They'll be wanting a piece of her,
that's for certain.
We'll give 'em a basting!
We did it once, we can do it again.
'Tis a cold lot, they are, though.
'Tis said they'll leave a man drowned
just to have the shirt off his back.
Tidn', right, tidn' fit,
tidn' fair, tidn' proper.
'Tis our beach, 'tis our bounds.
Clear as much cargo
as we can before they arrive.
Once they're here it will
be out of our hands.
It's mine, it's mine. She's mine!
I'll not be parted from her.
( Groans)
The situation is grave.
I'm given to understand there's a serious
risk to the passengers and crew.
- From drowning, sir?
- From the rabble on the beach.
And since many of the passengers
are gentlemen,
in particular my own cousin Matthew.
And then there's the matter of the cargo.
'Tis generally accepted that what's washed
ashore is property of the finder.
It is the property of the Warleggans and
anyone plundering will be guilty of theft.
And committing a capital offence.
I'm certain we understand each other.
Indeed we do, sir.
I had hoped...
I could have sworn she'd come round by now.
Will she yet, do you think?
I wish I could know for certain.
You should go, Jinny.
Help your family at Hendrawna.
( Knocking at door)
( Door opens)
( Footsteps)
I'll be off now, sir.
- Who's at the door?
- Someone to look after mistress.
The miners be here, Ross.
Far end of the beach.
Go home. Make the women and children safe.
Keep your doors shut and bolted.
Nay! I'll budge for no man.
'Tis our cove, 'tis our pickings.
Let them strip the vessel if they choose.
We've had the best of her.
Take him home. Before his mouth gets him
into mischief it can't talk him out of.
Yes, Mr Ross. God bless you, Mr Ross.
- Survivors, Ross. Been washed ashore.
- Where?
Far side of the beach,
coming in on the tide.
They won't last long
with 'Luggan's finest to greet 'em.
- Get everyone off the beach now.
- What will 'ee do?
See what I can do for the survivors.
( Shouting)
( Shouting and screaming)
( Screaming and shouting)
( Distorted shouting)
MAN: Help! Help!
( Groans)
Help!
Hey!
( Coughing and spluttering)
Sanson.
Keep your distance, man. We are armed.
I was about to offer you shelter.
Who are you?
My name is Poldark. I have a house nearby.
- Have you no control over these savages?
- None whatsoever.
It's a disgrace!
Two years ago I was shipwrecked off
Patagonia and treated less barbarously!
Perhaps the natives were better fed
than these miners.
Fed? If it were only food!
But all of our cargos has been pillaged and
we ourselves barely escaped with our lives.
- It's monstrous.
- There is much in this world which is monstrous.
Those who prefer not to freeze to death
follow me.
How do we know it's not a trap?
You'll have to take my word for it.
The word of a gentleman?
I must get word to Mr Warleggan.
He's already apprised, sir.
It was he who dispatched us.
You'll set about reclaiming our goods
from this rabble?
Never fear, sir. We'll soon restore order.
- I wouldn't count on it.
- I have my orders.
Then at least wait until daylight.
These people are fighting drunk
and quarrelling among themselves.
- Interfere and they'll turn on you.
- But if we fired into them?
Not half of you will come out alive.
Pardon me, gentlemen, but may I ask
for quietness, my wife is seriously ill.
- Ross. You're back.
- These men survived the wreck.
- They will need your attention.
- Forgive me, I was trying to sleep.
- ( Clears his throat)
- The news with Demelza?
I was too weak to come to the funeral.
- But hearing she might still be in danger...
- There's no need.
- She saved my child.
- Yes.
And lost yours in return.
- Oh, Ross, if I could do anything that would...
- You can.
You can pray to God
I do not lose the love of my life.
Of course.
Come back, my love. Come back.
ROSS: ( Whispers) Come on...
Has she come to take you?
No.
No, my love. She will never take me.
( Gulls cry)
( Low chatter)
I was sorry to hear of your loss.
The world is a darker place without her.
And a brighter one without him.
Could you have saved him?
Why would I wish to?
- Common decency.
- He showed none.
You insist that we are enemies
when, in fact, we have much in common.
And could be allies.
God forbid I should ever be desperate.
- Where's Julia?
- Sssh.
You've been asleep a long while.
There was a shipwreck.
- Where?
- On Hendrawna beach.
I've never seen a wreck.
Where's Julia?
( Sobs)
- When I was not with her.
- I was.
Could you tell that she was leaving us?
Was she afraid?
She was peaceful.
I held her in my arms.
Oh, Ross.
( Sobs)
That upstart is here again.
I really cannot face him.
- Let him be told we're not yet recovered.
- I will make our excuses.
Forgive my intrusion.
I was returning from the wreck. No doubt
you heard my cousin Matthew perished.
I wish there was some
consolation I could offer.
There is.
These are strange times, Elizabeth.
We should no longer stand on ceremony.
If you say so.
Sooner or later we must all declare.
For one side or another.
For which side do you declare?
For no side.
At least... for no man.
- You must not say this to me, George.
- Oh, I must.
And I do.
I will no longer have my feelings
misunderstood. Or my intentions.
I bid you good day, Elizabeth.
( Sobs)
( Footsteps)
I wish...
- I wish...
- What do you wish?
I wish I had a chance to say goodbye.
Geoffrey Charles is well.
We must take heart from that.
Can you?
And so must you.
Will you make it up with Francis?
Even though he betrayed us?
You make me ashamed.
Your heart is so generous.
You always see the good in things.
I will invite him to join
me at Wheal Leisure.
Together we try to resurrect
the fortunes of the Poldark mines.
Will that satisfy you?
So there is hope.
And it will not have been
for nothing, after all.
( Sobs)
Captain Poldark?
I have orders to take you to Truro Jail.
On what charge?
Wrecking. Inciting a riot.
- Murder.
- There's a mistake!
You cannot believe it. Ross, tell him!
Who accuses me?
George.
# I'd pluck a fair rose for my love
# I'd pluck a red rose blowing
# Love's in my heart
# A-trying so to prove
# What your heart's knowing